Hi friends
In this video let us analyse the time and space
complexity of the insertion sort algorithm
In the previous videos we have learnt about insertion sort
and how to implement it
so let us analyse the time complexity first and let us
assume that the array of size is five
let us see the best case first and the best
case here will be the array elements are already
sorted
so let us see how much time it takes in this best
case
So for the outer loop when i equal to one the
condition will be true
So it will go inside and check the while loop
condition
And when the while loop condition is checked that is
if first element is greater than the second one it
will fail
So this condition will be checked and it will be
failed
So the inner statements will be skipped in the next
iteration of outer loop
That is when i equal to two
Then also while loop will fail while comparing second and
third elements in the next iteration of outer loop that
is when i equal to three then also the while loop
condition will fail while comparing 3rd and 4th elements in
the next iteration when i equal to four
Then also the while loop condition will fail since Fourth
Element is not greater than fifth element
And in next iteration when i equal to five the condition
will fail and the execution will be stopped
So we can see that for five elements which were
already in sorted order we needed four which is five
minus one comparisons only
So in general for end sorted elements we require only
n minus one comparisons
So the best case time complexity of insertion sort
algorithm is order of n So that was the best
case
And now let us talk about the worst case
So when will be the worst case happening here The
worst case is when the elements are in descending order and
we have to make it in ascending order so let us see
So for the outer loop when i equal to one the
inner while loop condition will be checked and it will
be true that is to compare 1st and 2nd elements
and they are not in the right order
So while condition will be true and the swapping will
be performed and next when while is checked I would
be equal to zero Hence the condition will fail
So in the first iteration of outer for loop the
inner loop statement executed one time next when I equal
to 2 first while will be checked and it will
be true
So inner statements will be executed
Then in second iteration of while loop it will still
be true and the inner statements will be executed
And in third iteration of while loop I would be
equal to zero so it will fail
So in the second iteration of outer for loop the
inner loop statement executed two times Next when I equal
to three first while will be checked and it will
be true
So inner statements will be executed and in second
iteration of while loop it will still be true
So inner statements will again be executed and in
third iteration of while loop the while condition will still
be true
So again the inner statements will be executed and in
fourth iteration of while loop I will be equal to
zero so it will fail so we can say in
third iteration of the outer for loop the inner loop
statement executed three times next when i equal to three First
as usual while will be checked
It will be true
So inner statements will be executed
And in second iteration of while loop again it will
be true
So inner statements will be executed and in third
iteration
Also the condition will be true
So inner statements will be executed and in fourth
iteration
Also the while condition will be true
So inner statements will be executed and in fifth
iteration of while loop I will become zero so the
condition will fail so we can say in fourth iteration
of outer for loop the inner loop statement executed four
times
Next when I equal to five the outer for loop
condition it will fail so it will stop its execution
So when size equal to five the total time taken
is t of X equal to one plus two plus
three plus four that is five minus one which is
size minus one
So in general when size equal to n we will
have t(x)
equal to one plus two plus three Plus
etc plus n minus one
And we know that the sum of natural numbers from
1 to n is n into n plus one by two
But here the last number is n minus one
So we have to replace n as n minus one
So the equation will become n minus one into n
minus one plus one divided by two
And this minus one plus one will get cancelled
So this will become n minus one into n
Divided by two that is n square minus n whole
divided by two
So we got the time required
Now how can we get the time complexity Here We
just have to find the highest exponential and it is
n square here
So the worst case time complexity of insertion sort is
order of n square
So that was the time complexity and analysis of insertion
sort
Now let us do the space complexity analysis
So space complexity is a total amount of space a
particular algorithm takes to produce the output
So here array arr takes n units of
memory and size will take one unit and I value
and index
Each will take one unit of memory
So the total space S(X) is equal to n
plus four and it is a polynomial and the
degree is one so the space complexity will be order of
n so that was the space complexity
let us discuss about the auxillary space complexity so
as we learned auxillary space is the extra space
or temporary space use by an algorithm
So here the array arr and size are given input
The extra memory used by this insertion sort algorithm is
for I value and index
So one unit of space for I one for value
and one for index
So total auxillary space is equal to three units
Since it is a constant value we can say The
auxillary Space complexity of this algorithm is order of
one
And we know that if a sorting algorithm sorts all
the elements without using any extra memory or sorts all
the elements with auxillary Space Complexity as order of
one then we can call that sorting algorithm as an
in place sorting algorithm
So by that definition here insertion sort is definitely as inplace sorting algorithm.